>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief," I'm
George Noory.
We have a very different
program for you today,
and you will enjoy it.
Dr. Garrett Lisi with us, a
physicist who kind of went down
the other path, and
we're going to explain
why in just a moment.
Garrett, welcome
to "Beyond Belief".
>>GARRETT LISI:
Thank you George.
Good to be here.
>>NOORY: This path
that you have chosen
to go down, as
Robert Frost would
write, "two roads
diverged in a yellow wood.
I took the one less traveled by.
That has made all
the difference."
I think you took that path.
How come?
>>LISI: Indeed, it has
made all the difference.
It was back in graduate
school in theoretical physics
that I was really loving
general relativity and particle
physics.
And at the same time,
what I was learning
in particle physics wasn't
geometric the same way what
I was in general
relativity, which
is Einstein's theory of
gravity, was geometric.
And I knew there had to be
some geometric theory that
would also describe
particle physics,
but nobody seemed interested
in answering that problem.
They didn't see it as a problem.
But clearly the universe
is just one thing.
I mean, it's right there
in the name, universe.
So I set about trying to look
for a geometric description
of elementary particles.
And the most popular one at
the time was in string theory.
The whole community--
>>NOORY: Michio Kaku's
theories too, right?
>>LISI: Yes, very much
involved in that theory.
And the whole physics community
in high-energy theoretical
physics was going into
string-theory research,
and they were trying
to pull me into it.
And I took a couple
of courses in it.
But the more I looked into
string theory, the more
I just didn't believe that
was the right way to go.
I thought they had made a bunch
of unjustified assumptions.
>>NOORY: So you
didn't believe in it.
You didn't accept it.
>>LISI: That's right.
I was very skeptical
of string theory.
I thought they were making
unjustified assumptions
and they were overconfident
in the theory.
>>NOORY: And are you still?
>>LISI: Yes, I still felt that
way even more strongly now
because it's 20 years
later and the predictions
they were hoping for-- they
were hoping for super particles.
They were hoping for
some stringification--
>>NOORY: Hasn't happened yet.
>>LISI: --has not happened.
And so they're getting
more and more desperate
whereas I'm getting happier.
>>NOORY: You may be
the one who was right.
>>LISI: At least I
wasn't as wrong perhaps,
which in physics is important.
>>NOORY: That's true.
What is the big
difference between what
you were going after and what
they've been going after?
>>LISI: Well, essentially we
are going after the same thing.
We're going after a
mathematical description
of the fundamental nature
of our universe, all right?
It's just we're coming about
it from different perspectives.
They were coming at it
from a model of, well,
we can solve these problems
in quantum-field theory
by having extended particles,
have them be strings
instead of point particles.
And by having vibrations
of those strings
in various shapes,
various dimensions,
we can reproduce the properties
of the known particles.
So that's the string model.
And they can also reproduce
string's description
of gravity.
But I was coming at it from
a different perspective.
I was looking at, OK, we already
have a very successful theory
of particle physics and
quantum-field theory,
and we have a very
successful theory of gravity
in general relativity.
What's the most
minimal possible way
without doing any other damage
to the conceptual framework
to combine the two?
And the geometry
of particle physics
is wrapped up in these
geometric objects called
Lie groups which are these
high-dimensional twisting
surfaces.
And you can also describe
gravity during Lie groups.
So it was when I brought those
two together in a way that
was copacetic, they
actually matched up
in this very beautiful
mathematical structure
that mathematicians are quite
fond of called the E8 Lie
group.
>>NOORY: The Science
Channel talked a little bit
about your life, so let's
take a look at that.
>>MORGAN FREEMAN: 400 years ago
the great astronomer Galileo
Galilee had a
groundbreaking insight--
nature's grand book is written
in the language of mathematics.
From that time to this,
scientific geniuses
like Newton and
Einstein used math
to dig deep into the
working of nature.
The latest mind hoping to
join these illustrious ranks
is Garrett Lisi.
>>LISI: The universe
can very successfully
be described mathematically.
You have to imagine
how the world's working
in certain
circumstances and then
use reason and mathematics to
develop a description of how
that might be happening.
But it's imagination that breaks
a trail before reason enters.
>>FREEMAN: After
earning his PhD,
Garrett escaped the confines of
academia in search of adventure
and a space in which to think.
>>LISI: Rather than go into
a normal academic-track job,
I just split off for
Maui, became a surf bum,
and did the research
I wanted to.
Mostly spent time doing
physics research and surfing.
>>NOORY: Interesting
life Garrett.
>>LISI: Yeah, I pretty much
BASE jumped off the ivory tower.
>>NOORY: Just about.
>>LISI: Yeah.
I was doing quite well in
school all the way through it.
I got my PhD.
And instead of going
to get a postdoc--
the only postdocs available were
in string theory at the time,
and I wasn't interested
in going that way.
So I had saved up some
money during graduate school
by investing.
And I wasn't spending very much.
And so I was to a postdoc--
used to a graduate-student
lifestyle.
So I took off for Maui
and became a surf bum,
learned to windsurf, and worked
on the physics I wanted to.
It was kind of a crazy
decision to make,
but it has gone really well.
>>NOORY: Well I
was going to say,
you somehow combined both--
and we'll get into
that a little bit
later on-- because it
worked for you, didn't it?
>>LISI: I got really lucky.
I don't know how
else to describe it.
I seem to have gotten
lucky my whole life
both with my investments,
with my research in physics.
And it's hard not to
get lucky when you're
spending a lot of time surfing.
>>NOORY: As a physicist today,
what are you looking for?
What answers are
you trying to seek?
>>LISI: Well, the whole
reason I got into physics
is to figure out
what this universe is
that we're in, fundamentally.
And when I found
out as a young man
that the mathematics I
was learning and really
enjoying in an
abstract way actually
applies to describe
how our universe
functions, on a very
deep level it was just
intoxicating and addicting.
And I just became obsessed
with the puzzle of figuring out
how our universe
works mathematically
and fundamentally.
>>NOORY: All right,
I'm going to ask
you some nonphysics-type
questions
because we're not physicists
and most of us watching
aren't, but maybe you can
explain it to us in terms
that we would understand.
What the heck is the Big Bang?
Haven't found one
explanation yet in the years
I've been doing "Coast to
Coast" and "Beyond Belief",
I have not gotten
one explanation
that makes sense to me.
>>LISI: All right,
well, I'll do my best.
I can start out by
telling you what it isn't.
The Big Bang is not
an explosion of matter
from a point in space.
What the Big Bang is is we
look out into the cosmos
and we see distant galaxies
moving away from us.
And not only are they
moving away from us
but they're moving away from
us at an accelerating rate.
>>NOORY: Aren't we
moving with them?
>>LISI: We're also moving.
So it's as if everything
is moving away from itself.
So the entire
universe is expanding,
and that expansion
is accelerating.
So the main idea of
the Big Bang is, well,
if you look back in time--
>>NOORY: If it was going out.
>>LISI: --if it's
going out now--
>>NOORY: Then somehow
it came in, right?
>>LISI: Right, then
we know it came
from all being very
compressed and hot together.
>>NOORY: Logic
would tell you that.
>>LISI: Yes.
And it's not just logic.
We also have Einstein's
theory of general relativity,
which describes gravity.
And Einstein describes
this expanding universe
as an expanding fabric
of space itself.
And it looks like--
I mean, we're not
at the center of it
because there is no center.
In fact, it appears to be
an infinitely flat expanse
of space that is
expanding, and our place
in it of the Milky Way
is not at all special.
But since it's the
space itself that
seems to be expanding,
from our perspective
it just looks like everything
is expanding away from us.
But if you go back in time
about 14 billion years,
then it all looks like
everything was extremely close
together.
And that's what we
call the Big Bang.
>>NOORY: And do
you think it was?
>>LISI: Yes.
Yeah, the evidence for Big
Bang now is incontrovertible.
>>NOORY: What causes
the expansion?
>>LISI: Well, so matter
itself gravitates.
So you would think matter
would bring everything back in.
And 50 years ago the
predominant theory
was that we had
a closed universe
where there was some
initial expansion
but that the gravitational pull
would pull everything back in.
But we looked out into space
and only about 15 years ago
discovered that not only is
matter not putting itself back
in but it's actually
accelerating out faster.
And that was a shock.
>>NOORY: How far out can it go?
>>LISI: There's
no limit, George.
So it can expand out forever.
>>NOORY: That's what's
so bizarre to me.
>>LISI: Right,
there are infinities
all over our universe.
It looks like our universe
will expand out forever in time
and forever in space.
As far as we can tell,
this is how it work.
>>NOORY: And newer systems
are being created and born,
new star systems--
>>LISI: New star systems--
>>NOORY: --new solar systems?
>>LISI: --are being born.
However with this
expansion, as these stars
are born they burn hydrogen.
They fuse hydrogen and helium.
And this is where the nuclear
fuel that fuels our sun
comes from and other stars.
>>NOORY: They'll
burn out one day.
>>LISI: They'll burn out.
So they burn out.
They go supernova.
They form other stars.
Those burn out.
They form black holes.
>>NOORY: When they burn out.
>>LISI: After they burn out,
they attract gravitationally.
Within galaxies, we'll
have giant black holes
formed within galaxies.
>>NOORY: Basically
they're sucked in.
>>LISI: Yep, but
then those radiate.
So Hawking figured out
that black holes actually
emit radiation.
That radiation goes out into the
universe and then just expands.
So that all that matter that
was sucked into the black hole
goes away and you just
have radiation coming out.
And that happens
everywhere in the universe.
So if you go down the line
trillions and trillions
of years, you have
nothing in the universe
but dark blackness, and
that's all there is.
There's nothing else going on.
>>NOORY: Hawking also
says though the universe
is going to burn out.
>>LISI: This is what
it means to burn out.
>>NOORY: OK, there
will be nothing left,
total darkness one day.
The last star, the last
person, shut the light off.
>>LISI: Yeah, that's
exactly what happens.
So this is our future.
It's not a very bright future.
But trillions and trillions of
years, that's a lot of time--
>>NOORY: Like dead universe.
>>LISI: That's where things are
heading, yes, I'm afraid so.
That's what our
cosmology tells us.
>>NOORY: But other ones are
being born, other universes?
Do you believe in the
multiverse theory?
>>LISI: I don't
believe in anything.
I mean as a physicist, I have
degrees of belief in things.
So you flip a coin.
So you flip a coin
and you look at it
and before you
remove your hand you
have some confidence
that it's heads or tails.
And you have to have a
50% likelihood of each
if you have a reasonable coin.
You also have to have the
likelihood that, look,
there's no coin there at all.
There's also always
the weird option.
But for the most
part, as a physicist,
you have degrees of
belief in things.
Personally, I don't
have a high degree
of belief in other
universes being
born because we don't have good
mathematical models for it.
Philosophically, it's
not a terrible idea.
But scientifically, it
doesn't have a lot of content.
We can't test it
one way or another
since we can only do
tests in this universe.
So it's borderline
whether it's even science
to consider instances
of other universes.
But as a philosophical
idea, it's
certainly interesting
to consider.
>>NOORY: Well how in the
world, Garrett, did it start?
>>LISI: Well, if you go back--
>>NOORY: Are we bringing
God into the equation here?
>>LISI: If by we you mean
the royal we of you--
>>NOORY: You and me--
you and me.
>>LISI: --then you
can, but I'm not.
>>NOORY: Not, OK.
We'll get into that--
>>LISI: We can get into that.
>>NOORY: --in a moment too.
But in your opinion--
>>LISI: In my personal opinion--
>>NOORY: --how did it start?
I mean, my god.
>>LISI: Yeah, and it's
funny, you fall back
to using my god as the answer.
>>NOORY: It's an
easy solution, right?
You blame it on god.
>>LISI: Right, god did it.
It's always the easiest
solution until you have
to explain where she came from.
>>NOORY: That's
right, or he, or it.
>>LISI: So if you follow the
expansion of the universe
and you go back in
time 14 trillion years
or so to where it was very
hot, it's not impossible
that you can just keep going
back in time before the Big
Bang.
And you can actually have
models for our universe
where it expands
indefinitely forever in time.
>>NOORY: Which is
what you think.
>>LISI: I personally
hold that opinion.
I have a higher degree
of belief in that.
>>NOORY: But that still
doesn't explain how it started.
>>LISI: It wouldn't
have had a beginning.
>>NOORY: Everything
needs a beginning.
>>LISI: That's because
we're used to existing
in this flow of time.
We're used to our
personal flow of time.
We're born.
Things happen.
We see that.
>>NOORY: Yes, I'm thinking in
very logical stages of time.
>>LISI: Well, in this
model of the universe
there always would
have been a before.
>>NOORY: So you're saying--
>>LISI: Whatever there is,
there would have been a
>>NOORY: --that whatever
happened to the expansion,
it was there.
It was always there.
But how did it get there?
>>LISI: Well, this
is the question
of what is the universe?
So if you consider that time
extended forever before the Big
Bang and it will extend
forever into our future,
then you can look at this
as a whole in spacetime
as one whole thing in spacetime.
The name of this is called
the block universe model.
You look at it as a whole.
Now if you look at
this as a whole,
it looks like a
four-dimensional hyperbola
where you have something
expanding for forever
and then out like a
giant expanding horn.
It looks like a
four-dimensional hyperbola
where our spatial slices
are flat but expanding.
So it looks sort of
like a big giant horn
in four dimensions-- of
four-dimensional space,
not in four dimensions.
So if you look at this,
this is a familiar geometry.
It goes by the
name of someone who
described it named de Sitter.
So it's a de Sitter spacetime.
And it turns out a
de Sitter spacetime
can be described as a
four-dimensional surface
inside a larger mathematical
geometry called a Lie group.
So you can describe
this geometry
inside other geometries.
And these are the
same geometries
that are used to describe
particle physics.
If we model it this
way, we can see
our cosmological,
four-dimensional spacetime
universe as existing inside
a Lie group that is excited,
that's deforming.
The idea is you have to start
with some ultimate object.
So there has to be something.
So to start with something--
it's very satisfying to me
to start with the most
beautiful mathematical geometric
structure you can consider.
It's this
high-dimensional, twisting,
very intricately twisted knot
of beautiful, high-dimensional
geometry.
And then see that inside that
are all the subgeometries
we need to describe
particle physics
and to embed our
four-dimensional universe.
And then if that
somehow got excited
in a quantum-mechanical
way, then we
could see all the interactions
happening that we see around us
in our universe.
We can model that, but we
have to start with something.
So for me, philosophically,
it's more satisfying--
I have a higher degree of belief
that our universe fundamentally
is a very beautiful
high-dimensional geometric
object that has become excited
in a quantum-mechanical way.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
10 years ago you spoke
at a TED conference.
>>LISI: Yes.
This particular pattern of
charges in eight dimensions
is actually part of the most
beautiful geometric structure
in mathematics.
It's a pattern of the largest
exceptional Lie group E8.
This Lie group is a
smooth curved shape
with 248 dimensions.
Each point in this
pattern corresponds
to a symmetry of this very
complex and beautiful shape.
One small part of
this E8 shape can
be used to describe the
curved spacetime of Einstein's
general relativity,
explaining gravity.
Together with quantum mechanics,
the geometry of this shape
could describe everything
about how the universe works
at the tiniest scales.
And the pattern of
the shape, living
in eight-dimensional
charge space,
is exquisitely beautiful.
And it summarizes thousands
of possible interactions
between these elementary
particles, each of which
is just a facet of
this complicated shape.
As we spin it, we can see many
of the other intricate patterns
contained in this one.
And with a, particular
rotation, we
can look down
through this pattern
in eight dimensions
along our symmetry axis
and see all the
particles at once.
It's a very beautiful object.
And, as with any unification,
we can see some holes
where new particles are
required by this pattern.
There are 20 gaps when
new particles should be,
two of which have been filled
by the [INAUDIBLE] particles.
From their location
in this pattern,
we know that these new particles
should be scalar fields,
like the Higgs particle, but
have color charge and interact
with the strong force.
Filling in these new particles
completes this pattern,
giving us the full E8.
This E8 pattern has very
deep mathematical roots,
and it's considered by many to
be the most beautiful structure
in mathematics.
It's a fantastic
prospect that this object
of great mathematical
beauty could describe
the truth of particle
interactions at the smallest
scales imaginable.
>>NOORY: All right, so that
was an interesting portion
of your entire TED talk.
What did that mean?
>>LISI: Well, the
meaning to me is
that, ultimately, elementary
particle physics comes down
to geometry.
And it's all beautiful
mathematical geometry
behind elementary particles
and their interactions,
including gravitational
interactions between particles.
So for me, this is very
inspiring philosophically
because I like the
idea that we live
in this very intricate,
elegant, beautiful universe.
>>NOORY: We do.
There's no doubt about that.
>>LISI: And it's the
chaos of interactions
between the myriad
of particles that
produce life and nature and
everything we see around us.
>>NOORY: You don't think God
had anything to do with that?
>>LISI: Well, if you're going
to go back and think of some
supernatural entity that
would bring everything
into existence--
>>NOORY: Can you accept that?
>>LISI: Can I accept it?
I can consider it as a model.
>>NOORY: Are you?
>>LISI: The closest
thing I can come
to that is that it would
be that we would actually
be in a simulated universe.
>>NOORY: All right,
some people think that.
>>LISI: Some people think that,
and that's not an unreasonable
thing to consider,
and that something
that we might primitively
have considered
as a supreme being might be
someone or something running
the simulation.
However, when we go back
and look throughout history
and our current
investigations into science,
there's nothing at all
that strays significantly
from what we know scientifically
how the universe should behave.
So right now we have scientific
models for elementary particles
down to enormously
small scales, and we
have models for the cosmos up
to enormously large scales,
and we know
everything in between.
We know everything that can
happen in between physically
and scientifically.
We know what can happen.
And nowhere in there is anything
where, and then the hand of God
comes in and twiddles this
and that made this happen.
There's nothing in
there like that.
It's always, these were the
forces, this was the balance,
this was the acceleration
of the particle out,
these were the force
fields in place,
and all this describes
everything that happens,
absolutely everything.
We see the grandeur
of nature come out
from the interactions of all
these fairly primitive pieces,
but we see it emerge.
This is the magic of emergence
in our universe as we--
>>NOORY: How did get
so much order, Garrett?
Because it is order.
There's no randomness
here at all.
How did that happen?
>>LISI: We started out with
a very ordered beginning.
And things interact and
self-interact, and quantum
mechanically it spreads
into all possibilities.
So if you interpret quantum
mechanics in the simplest
possible way, it tells
us that we started out
with an ordered universe
that got excited.
And then from that
excited state it
expanded into all
possible interactions
of all these existing particles
and all new particles that
could pop into existence so
that all universes are happening
quantum mechanically.
And we find ourselves
in this one.
>>NOORY: Why is
it so difficult--
and I'm not singling
you out, by any means--
but why is it so difficult
for scientists to accept
the possibility that there's a
divine intelligence behind all
of this, whether it's
consciousness, whatever--
because I don't know what it is.
But why is it so difficult
for scientists to accept that?
>>LISI: But it's not a
matter of acceptance.
Remember, I said I
don't believe in things.
I have degrees of
belief in things.
I process via likelihoods
of what is the likelihood
something's going to be true?
And when you're a scientist
and you spend time in labs,
you do experiments, you
read about other experiments
that other scientists
have done, and you
build up all of this
knowledge of ways
the universe has been
probed and tested
and understood, going back
hundreds and hundreds of years,
and you take that knowledge
and you look at it,
and it all makes sense.
And there's nothing in
there that says, oh,
and then this we don't
really understand.
It must have been some supreme
power that set this up.
There's nothing in
there like that.
There's no need for it.
There's no evidence
that anything like that
has ever happened.
And as scientists, we
look for that stuff.
So we want--
>>NOORY: Theologians
would go crazy
if they heard you right now.
>>LISI: No, we, as scientists,
we want to find new stuff.
We want to find any
variation from known science
because that makes your career.
If you can find something
that's a little bit off
from what is described by
known physics, you're golden.
That's great as a scientist.
That's what you look for.
So scientists look for ESP.
They look for telekinesis.
>>NOORY: But they
never agree with it.
>>LISI: It's not that
they don't agree with it.
>>NOORY: But maybe
you're looking for it--
>>LISI: --and we fail--
>>NOORY: --but
you can't find it?
>>LISI: --to find it.
We get negative result
after negative result.
>>NOORY: But then how do you
explain these incredible things
that happen?
How do you explain miracles?
How do you explain
people who have
these telepathic
experiences and they're
able to say things that
haven't happened yet
and they do and
they're documented?
How do you explain all that?
It's not randomness.
It's not lock.
>>LISI: No, it's not randomness.
It's not luck.
>>NOORY: And I don't believe
in coincidences at all.
>>LISI: It's not
extraordinary coincidence.
The simplest explanation
in 99.9% of the cases
are that people are lying.
They're telling stories.
And most often--
>>NOORY: They can all be lying.
>>LISI: --when they're
most convincing,
they're telling those
stories to themselves.
They've convinced themselves--
>>NOORY: I've got
to have you on a--
>>LISI: --that what
they believe is true.
>>NOORY: --debate panel one day.
>>LISI: I'm quite happy
to investigate things.
>>NOORY: How do you explain
what we're doing here?
I'll accept the fact that the
universe had all these things,
these quantum particles and all
that stuff that you work on.
I'll accept that.
How do you explain us, what
you're doing here with me right
now, how we get by?
We eat.
We sleep.
We procreate.
How do you explain all that?
>>LISI: Yeah, this is all so
complex and rich and detailed
and emotions are
involved and everything's
crazy and going on.
There's so much.
How could this come from
just elementary particles?
The key is emergence.
The key is we look at a handful
of elementary particles.
And already just by
simulating the interaction
of a handful of
elementary particles,
it's beyond our capability
to predict everything
that can happen from this.
We can't predict.
It's chaotic what this produces.
We can simulate it, but starting
from some initial condition,
there's so much sensitivity
to that initial condition.
If you just simulate
that for a few seconds,
we don't know what state
it will be in after that.
And that's just with a few.
When you start getting up,
you go from a few particles,
then you start building
molecules, atoms,
and organic molecules, long
chains of organic molecules.
And these organic molecules
all interact in complex ways.
And these can be assembled
into organelles inside cells.
And then the cells,
biologically,
can join into
multicellular organisms.
And you're talking
about trillions
of interacting things.
And those interacting
things themselves
can be fairly simple, right?
A cell doesn't think
about what you're
going to have for breakfast.
A cell's just thinking about its
neighbors and what's going on.
But you put trillions
of things together
and these trillions of cells
are thinking about what they're
going to have for breakfast.
This emerges.
So when you have vast numbers
of simple interacting things
but they're interacting in
ways that lead to complexity,
then we have the emergence
of complex behavior.
And this is what we are.
>>NOORY: Are other
physicists who
do not accept your theories,
your th-- what do they
think of all of this?
Because they have
different thoughts too.
>>LISI: I'm actually in
agreement for the most
part with other physicists.
>>NOORY: Are they with you?
>>LISI: What I have proposed is
some mathematical observations
and a proposal about how
the universe might work,
and I'm working
down those lines.
And so far I haven't
met with huge success
in the past few years
I've been working on it,
but it's sufficiently
inspiring that I
think something there is right,
which is what I'm pursuing.
>>NOORY: If you had a chance to
have met and discussed things
with Albert Einstein, what
would you have asked him?
>>LISI: Oh wow.
Sure, I would have
loved the opportunity
to talk with Einstein.
I mean, he passed
away in late '50s,
and he passed away right before
a real explosion in knowledge
of particle physics.
>>NOORY: And he did all
this without a computer.
>>LISI: Yeah, it was all--
>>NOORY: Chalkboard.
>>LISI: --chalkboard,
pencil and paper.
But he never really got to
see our current knowledge
of particle physics.
>>NOORY: Would he be impressed?
>>LISI: He'd be
impressed but he'd also
be pretty baffled at first.
>>NOORY: Would he
be proven right?
>>LISI: He has been proven
right over and over again
for his theory of gravity.
But there were so many
elementary particles,
the whole structure of the
standard model of particle
physics, like the weak force was
just starting to be considered.
And Gell-Mann had not come out
with his Lie group description
of the strong force yet.
So Einstein passed away before
we knew most of modern particle
physics.
And quantum-field theory
had been developed but just
to a very minimal degree.
And we didn't have this whole
zoo of elementary particles
that we now know about.
So I would have
asked Einstein what
he would make of this zoo
of elementary particles
in the context of his theory
of general relativity.
>>NOORY: Well
Garrett, what would
have caused this
explosion of knowledge
from the Einstein days
to where we are now?
What happened?
>>LISI: There were two
things that happened.
One was the development in
mathematics of Yang-Mills
theory or the idea of
Ehresmann connections
and principal bundles which
are these abstract mathematical
things and basically
the use of Lie groups
to describe complex geometries.
So that happened in mathematics.
So Einstein knew
about Lie groups,
and he actually talked to
a friend of mine about them
shortly before he
passed away, thought
they were a very
interesting subject.
But he didn't have
time to investigate
that area of mathematics
because it was so new,
and it was just starting to
be considered for physics.
>>NOORY: Einstein
believed in God.
>>LISI: No he didn't.
>>NOORY: I think he did.
>>LISI: No, there's
no indication he--
and he made reference
to something
like Spinoza's god which is--
>>NOORY: Want a do over there?
>>LISI: --the god of nature.
So he referred to
god as nature, which
is sort of an amorphous,
impersonal way of considering
the universe.
>>NOORY: Yeah, but
it was something.
>>LISI: It was something but
it wasn't a supreme being.
>>NOORY: I mean, I
don't know what God is.
All I know is there's
something there
that has helped jump
start all of this.
I don't believe-- and I
was raised a Catholic.
I don't believe in
some guy sitting
in a throne in the clouds,
which is how they taught us what
God was in catechism classes.
I don't believe that
at all, anymore.
I don't know.
I don't know what it is.
If I were interviewing
the pope today,
I'm not sure he could
give me a good answer.
>>LISI: It's a different
kind of model for reality.
Personally, I find
scientific models of reality
much more satisfying.
I am very happy with mathematics
and mathematical descriptions.
They're precise.
And they are extraordinarily
successful for describing
what happens when we
attempt to apply that.
>>NOORY: Somewhere
along the line
the physicist Garrett
decided to change.
And you picked up and
moved to Maui, surfed.
What caused that
metamorphosis for you?
I mean, did you
give up on science?
>>LISI: Oh, it was
the exact opposite.
So when I got my PhD,
rather than go and get
a postdoc somewhere and continue
climbing the academic ladder,
I decided I could
more thoroughly
devote myself to
scientific investigation
if I just went to an island
and worked by myself.
>>NOORY: All right,
so you did this.
What did you do for a living?
How did you exist?
>>LISI: Good question.
Why didn't I starve?
What had happened is--
well first of all, academia,
you have to understand,
is in a very strange
situation right now.
And it's in that situation
because of the way economics
work within academia.
There's a demand
for cheap labor.
And cheap labor in academia
is graduate students.
So what happens is
for the people who
graduate at the top of their
class as undergraduate--
>>NOORY: They grab
them, don't they?
>>LISI: Yeah, so I graduated
at the top of my class
as an undergraduate, and I got
invitations to go to schools,
and they were going
to throw money at me--
>>NOORY: As a
teacher, professor?
>>LISI: As a research
assistant and graduate student
and teaching assistant.
>>NOORY: And pay you?
>>LISI: So I got a good offer.
I went to UC San Diego.
And I also like
playing with computers.
I have ever since
I was a young kid.
So I took a bunch of this money.
I bought a really nice
computer called the NeXT.
The NeXT was the
computer company
started by Steve Jobs when
he was kicked out of Apple.
>>NOORY: And then
he came back again.
>>LISI: What happened was the
operating system for the NeXT
computer was based on Unix.
And this was in the '90s.
It was a great operating system,
very intuitive user interface,
worked great.
Apple, in the meantime,
was dealing with system 7,
Mac OS-- you know, system 7.
And it was just terrible.
And they didn't know what to do.
They needed a new
operating system.
>>NOORY: They needed
Steve Jobs back.
That's what they needed.
>>LISI: So what they did
is Apple bought NeXT.
But really what happened
is NeXT bought Apple
for a negative amount of money
because Steve Jobs became
the interim--
>>NOORY: He came
right back in again.
>>LISI: --CEO.
He put his people from NeXT
into the head of Apple now.
And now essentially
Apple became NeXT.
And the NeXTSTEP operating
system that I had been using,
I knew that was going to
become the new operating
system for Apple.
So I took all that
money that I'd been
given for graduate school--
because even though
I was cheap labor,
it was more money
than I'd ever seen.
I invested that in
Apple stock in the '90s
when everybody thought it was
going to go out of business.
>>NOORY: And you made
a home run with that.
>>LISI: Yeah, I made a
bunch of money out of it.
So that's what let
me move to Maui
and work on physics on my
own and be a surf bum instead
of going out to get a postdoc.
>>NOORY: So what did
you do with your money?
>>LISI: Well, over
the years I've
seen different waves coming.
So it was actually
when I was here
living in Colorado in Frisco
in Summit County trying out
being a snowbird bum
for a couple seasons.
>>NOORY: Ski bum, a surfer bum.
>>LISI: And then I was really
enjoying using Netflix.
And I saw that Netflix was
well positioned, first of all,
to take advantage
of the postal system
for cheap mail of their DVDs.
>>NOORY: DVDs at the time.
>>LISI: And then also
they were very well
positioned to take
advantage of the internet,
to stream movies to people
for a very low cost.
So my next investment
was Netflix,
and I did quite well with that.
And then more recently
in around 2010
I caught wind of
this cryptocurrency,
this digital currency
called Bitcoin.
>>NOORY: I have questions
about that stuff, but go ahead.
>>LISI: That was
just getting started.
And so I put a
little bit of money
in Bitcoin because it seemed
like a really cool idea
and just sort of
let that sit there.
And it's been a while.
And that did unusually well.
>>NOORY: I don't think it's
going to hold its value.
What do you think, as of now?
>>LISI: At this point I'm
too scared to sell it.
>>NOORY: Really?
You can make money if you
sold what you have now.
>>LISI: I could.
I don't have enough Bitcoin
to make me a good kidnapping
target.
I've got far less than
half a million dollars
of Bitcoin at current
valuation, far less than that.
>>NOORY: All right, well
let's take a look at what
cryptocurrency really is.
>>LISI: Certainly
happy to talk about it.
>>NARRATOR: There's
Bitcoin, there's Litecoin,
there's Ethereum.
So just what is cryptocurrency
and how does it work?
Essentially it's digital money
that is bought and sold online.
There are no bills
or coins, it's not
based on another
asset like gold,
and it doesn't go through
traditional financial
institutions like banks.
Instead, these
currencies operate
in a completely
decentralized system
that uses so-called
blockchain technology
to track transactions.
To see how this works, let's
look at how you buy something
with cryptocurrency.
Say that Alice wants to buy a
bike from Dan using Bitcoin,
her cryptocurrency of choice.
Alice begins by logging
into her Bitcoin wallet
with a private key, a unique
combination of letters
and numbers.
With a traditional
financial transaction,
the exchange gets sent
to banks on each side who
record the money being
subtracted from one account
and added to another.
But remember, in
this scenario, there
are no banks or middlemen.
Instead, Alice's transaction
is shared with everyone
in the Bitcoin network.
These networked computers
add Alice's transaction
to a shared list of recent
transactions known as a block.
Every 10 minutes, the
newest block of transactions
is added on or chained to
all the previous blocks.
That's how you get a blockchain.
To ensure that each block
of transactions on the chain
is verified, a subset
of Bitcoin's network
joins a race to solve a
very difficult math puzzle.
And if they solve it
first, their record
of the block of transactions
becomes the official record.
They're rewarded with
bitcoins of their own
and the network gets a
new block on the chain.
This entire process
is known as mining,
but instead of
chipping away at rock,
you're solving complex puzzles.
The fact that many computers
are competing to verify a block
ensures that no single computer
can monopolize the Bitcoin
market.
To ensure the competition
stays fair and evenly timed,
the puzzle becomes harder
when more computers join in.
The Bitcoin protocol
says mining will
continue until there are 21
million bitcoins in existence.
That's set to
happen around 2140,
if Bitcoin lasts that long.
>>NOORY: Sell your bitcoins.
>>LISI: So you think
they're tulips?
>>NOORY: I do.
I don't think
there's legs to it.
And it is going down.
>>LISI: It's been going down.
It's been going up.
It's been going down.
It's been going on.
>>NOORY: I mean it's like
$6,000 $7,000 a coin now.
It was at, what, $15,000?
>>LISI: So you
have to understand,
in 2010 it was a few cents.
>>NOORY: Right, but then the
craze caught on and pushed it.
>>LISI: Well, wait a minute.
The craze caught on and it
went up to about $8.00 or so.
And then it shot up to $20
and then back down to $10,
and then it--
>>NOORY: What caused it--
>>LISI: --stayed
there for a while.
>>NOORY: --to go down?
>>LISI: There have been waves
of popularity of Bitcoin.
>>NOORY: It's not too
popular right now.
>>LISI: Well, it's spread
into wider awareness.
So it's a matter of how
fast this idea spreads.
So there's no government
behind Bitcoin, right?
It's just a digital
currency between geeks?
>>NOORY: What do you do with it?
>>LISI: You could buy a house.
You can go to a website,
find houses for sale.
There price is
listed in bitcoin.
>>NOORY: And what about cars
and what about food, same thing?
>>LISI: Yes.
Most grocery stores
won't accept it,
but you can find stores
that will accept it.
Bitcoin is better for
more largely priced items.
>>NOORY: And how do you exchange
the purchase of the bitcoin
to the other individual?
How do you do that?
>>LISI: You have someone there
with the deed for the house.
They sign the deed.
You're here with your computer.
You transfer your bitcoin.
They see that your bitcoin
shows up in their account.
You don't even really
need an escrow agent.
It's a straight exchange.
>>NOORY: And you've got
the bitcoin it's yours.
Can it be hacked?
>>LISI: You can see it transfer.
If your passphrase or
password for your bitcoin
falls into somebody else's
hands, they own your bitcoin.
>>NOORY: What was
blockchain technology
that they were talking
about on that tape?
>>LISI: Yeah, so
this was actually
quite a good description.
The blockchain is the
ledger of what has
happened to all the bitcoin.
So every bitcoin is
tracked in this ledger.
And right now, currently,
with all the transactions--
>>NOORY: It's like the
good book in heaven.
>>LISI: Essentially it's the
record of every transaction
that has happened--
>>NOORY: Ever?
>>LISI: --ever
with Bitcoin, going
back to when it was first
started in 2009 or so.
And right now the whole
ledger is about 145 gigabytes.
>>NOORY: That's a
lot of gigabytes.
>>LISI: Yeah, it's
a lot of gigabytes.
But you know, terabyte drives
are like $100 right now,
so it's still almost nothing.
>>NOORY: But that's
the blockchain?
>>LISI: That's the
entire blockchain.
And every 10 minutes another
1 megabyte of transaction data
is added to that blockchain.
There's a block.
Each block is 1 megabyte.
>>NOORY: What causes
it to go up or down--
>>LISI: The price?
>>NOORY: --demand?
>>LISI: Yeah.
The supply is capped.
So unlike some country's
currency where they have a mint
and they print currency,
however much they want,
the supply of bitcoin is
capped at 21 million total.
>>NOORY: That's it?
>>LISI: That's it.
>>NOORY: 21 million
coins you mean?
>>LISI: 21 million
coins, it will not
be more than that ever.
You cannot increase the number
of bitcoin past 21 million.
It's built into the system.
>>NOORY: So 21
million will be it.
>>LISI: Yes.
>>NOORY: It'll be spread among
all the people on the planet
who might want to buy bitcoins.
>>LISI: Who want it, yes.
And the transactions
happen purely
in terms of new records
entering the ledger.
So when I send
someone a bitcoin,
that goes into this pool.
And there are many thousands
of computers distributed
throughout the world who will
see my potential transaction as
well as a small fee
that I'm willing to pay
to make that transition happen.
And then they will
take that transaction
and put it in their block,
in their 1-megabyte block.
And then they will try to, as I
said, solve this math problem.
So what they're doing is they
take all these transactions
from the pool that people want
to make with their bitcoin.
And they get it in
their 1-megabyte block.
And then they use
what's called a hash.
>>NOORY: Who's they?
>>LISI: All the
thousands of people
who are trying to
make money in Bitcoin.
They're trying to mine bitcoin.
So by doing this process,
the winner of this process
wins a few bitcoin.
And bitcoin is, as you
said, worth $7,000 or $8,000
a coin right now.
And they win a few if
they can win this search.
So basically they have
this 1-megabyte block
of transactions.
And they're looking
for a magic number.
That number is called
a nonce, which is
short for a number used once.
So they're looking
for this nonce.
It will be the magic nonce
such that when they combine it
in a formula that scrambles
this information reversibility,
it comes up with a certain
number of leading zeros.
So you have this 1 megabyte of
data which you can represent
in a computer as a number.
You combine it with a
number in a formula that
gives other data that's a
megabyte through a set formula.
And if that formula
and that nonce
produces a new set of data
with a set of leading zeros,
say 8 to 20 leading
zeros or something,
then they found the magic nonce.
And then they announce
that to the rest
of the network and they
are rewarded with bitcoin
and that 1 megabyte
of transaction
is added to the block.
>>NOORY: Is there a future
for cryptocurrency--
>>LISI: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: --in your opinion?
You think it's going to be big?
>>LISI: It's such
an amazing thing.
It's decentralized.
It's not owned by
any government.
It can cross borders,
international borders,
frictionlessly.
And it's not secret.
It's all out in the open.
Everything's on the
blockchain, every transaction,
but you don't know
who is associated
with each transaction.
>>NOORY: It's confidential.
>>LISI: It's not confidential.
It's a wallet number.
So with each bitcoin
you have a wallet.
You have a wallet associated
with a bunch of bitcoin.
And in order to make
transactions using that wallet
you need your key.
And that key you can access
via password or passphrase.
So you could memorize 12 words,
12 random words, and use that
to unlock your Bitcoin wallet.
Now if anybody else
gets those 12 words,
they have access to
your Bitcoin wallet.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
>>LISI: But that's
what secures it.
It's secured by your own
ability to keep that information
secret.
And with that secret you
can access and move bitcoin
in and out of your wallet.
And it's a very
convenient thing to do.
I don't know if you've ever
tried to do a wire transfer.
>>NOORY: Oh yeah, I've
done those through banks.
>>LISI: It's a pain.
You've got to fill
out a form, all this.
>>NOORY: You've got to go in.
You've got to sit
down with a bank.
You've got to do it all.
This you just say you do
online and that's it, huh?
>>LISI: It takes seconds
George, takes seconds.
>>NOORY: It's wild.
It's wild.
>>LISI: In principle,
digital currency
is such a practical
thing that, yes,
I think it's going to be
around for a very long time.
>>NOORY: So you don't
see it collapsing?
>>LISI: I don't.
I see it spreading.
Right now there are hundreds
of different coins being used--
>>NOORY: There's a
company, a brand-new one,
that deals with
selling coins to people
interested in the paranormal.
It's called Onstellar.
>>LISI: That's great.
>>NOORY: And that's
what they're doing.
So they'll probably
be successful.
>>LISI: I wouldn't bet on it.
So there's been such a success
with Bitcoin and Ethereum
and Litecoin, as we mentioned.
I mean, all these things
have been very successful.
They've gone up, so more and
more people are piling in.
It's a little bit
like a pyramid scheme.
Actually it's a lot
>>NOORY: Right,
it's a lot like it--
a lot like it.
>>LISI: But it does have
the practicality behind it
of making for easy
digital transactions.
And these different
coins are designed
to be specialized for
different purposes.
And they can be very useful
for these different purposes.
You can keep track of
electrical power this way.
There's a coin
called Power Ledger.
Anyway, there are all
these different coins
that can be used for
different purposes.
The problem is there's
so many, there's
been such an explosion of coins.
They can't all be successful.
>>NOORY: What's a physicist
doing dabbling in this stuff?
>>LISI: I gotta eat.
>>NOORY: All right, so you're
doing it as an investment?
>>LISI: When I
see a wave coming,
you know, as an investment
wave, I try to get on it.
So whether that's in real
estate or cryptocurrency--
stocks is where I have
most of my experience--
I try to ride those waves.
And that's how I've been
financially successful
throughout my life.
I'm not wildly successful,
but I eat well.
>>NOORY: So you're
doing all that.
You've moved to Maui.
Have you given up physics?
>>LISI: Absolutely not.
This is just what
I do on the side
to fund the physics research.
>>NOORY: All right, so you're
still doing physics research.
So by moving to Maui you
didn't give up on life.
>>LISI: No, I'm trying to
have as much life as I can.
Life in Maui is fantastic.
>>NOORY: Well, let's take a
look at physics and surfing.
>>LISI: Sure.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>NOORY: So this is
a little push there
to tie that in the physics.
But where do you see,
Garrett, physics headed?
What's the next
evolution for us?
>>LISI: Well, ideally
what I'd like to do
is make more progress in
having a quantum description
of the geometry that
I've used to describe
elementary particles
and gravity and see
if I can get a quantized
description of the theory using
other advanced
mathematical structures.
>>NOORY: Are you going
to blow this planet wide
open with some new knowledge?
>>LISI: I hope you're speaking
only in an abstract sense.
>>NOORY: Yes, of course.
We don't want you playing
around with protons and neutrons
and things like that.
The atom, leave it alone.
>>LISI: Even though
I have a lair
on a volcano in the middle
of the Pacific Ocean,
I'm not actually a supervillain.
I'm really just trying to solve
the ultimate puzzles of nature
as best I can.
>>NOORY: But what do
we need on this planet
to find out that we don't
really know right now?
What's the answer--
>>LISI: Well the
ultimate question--
>>NOORY: --out there?
>>LISI: The ultimate
question right now
is how to correctly
describe quantum gravity.
We don't currently have a--
>>NOORY: What does that mean?
>>LISI: --description.
>>NOORY: To a layman,
what's quantum gravity mean?
>>LISI: Well, currently we
have a good quantum description
of atoms and
elementary particles,
and we have a good description
of strong gravitational fields.
Like around stars, black
holes, our whole cosmos,
we have a good
description of that.
What we don't have is we don't
have a microscopic description
of gravity.
When we try to use quantum
mechanics to describe gravity,
we don't get good answers.
>>NOORY: Sir Isaac
Newton simply told us,
just drop two things,
that's gravity.
>>LISI: People are trying that.
So they've done experiments
of microscopic objects dropped
in gravity.
And you can see how
quantum mechanics does
apply when things are in
a gravitational field,
but they can't have
a quantum description
of the gravitational
field itself.
>>NOORY: Without gravity--
>>LISI: There's no
such description.
>>NOORY: Without
gravity could we exist?
>>LISI: Not in our
current form, no.
>>NOORY: We'd be torn apart?
>>LISI: Well, you can think
of some organisms that
could exist in a
nongravitating cloud of matter.
But our entire
existence has evolved
on this planet where we have
a strong gravitational field
pulling us down towards
the center of the earth.
>>NOORY: So if we get this
answer to that question,
what is the quantum gravity--
>>LISI: How is
gravity quantized?
>>NOORY: --what does
that mean to us?
How is that going to
change my day-to-day life?
>>LISI: Well, there will be some
beautiful bit of mathematics
underneath it that describes
how our universe functions
on a very fundamental level.
We'll have a unified theory
that describes both gravity
and particle physics.
And I would think you would
find it more philosophically
satisfying to know
that there is--
>>NOORY: Does it put
food on my table?
>>LISI: That's more about
permaculture farming
and other very high-quality
methods of living
than about fundamental physics.
But why do you want
the food on the table?
You have food on the table
so you can eat it, enjoy it,
and then spend your time
enjoying life and thinking
about stuff.
So what are you
going to think about?
What I choose to think
about is the deepest
puzzle I could find in the
universe, which is what is it?
What is the universe?
That's why I eat.
>>NOORY: We may never
get that answer.
>>LISI: We might
not live to see it.
I'd like to live longer if I
possibly can and get to see it.
>>NOORY: Do you believe
in life after death?
>>LISI: I barely believe in--
I believe in life during life.
>>NOORY: You barely
believe in life, right?
>>LISI: No, I don't believe
in life after death.
There's no evidence anything
like that would exist.
As far as we know,
our conscious minds
require a physical
substrate to exist.
>>NOORY: Have you ever in your
life asked for something--
maybe there was someone in
your family that was sick
or whatever--
and said, God, please help me?
Ever?
Ever use that phrase?
>>LISI: Sure, when I was a
little kid inside my head.
>>NOORY: Then why'd
you grow out of that?
>>LISI: It never
got me anything.
>>NOORY: Yet.
Maybe it did.
Maybe it got you to
where you are today?
>>LISI: If you keep talking
to yourself inside your head
and asking for
things, you're going
to get those things
some of the time.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>LISI: But then
that doesn't mean
that some supernatural
power made it happen.
It just means that happened.
>>NOORY: But could you accept
the fact that it's possible?
>>LISI: If there was
any evidence for it
at all I'd have a higher
degree of belief in it.
>>NOORY: Do you go to meetings
with your peers and colleagues?
>>LISI: Yeah, I
go to conferences.
>>NOORY: And if so, what do they
think of the you, of your work?
>>LISI: They think
I'm a little weird.
They also--
>>NOORY: No!
>>LISI: They also like
coming out to Maui to visit.
>>NOORY: Who wouldn't?
>>LISI: Although I had an
unusual lifestyle hopping
around--
so after I got my PhD, I
didn't go to Maui immediately.
I spent time in
different friends' houses
where I spent time working on
physics while I took advantage
of their hospitality.
And I got a lot of good work
done while traveling around
to beautiful places
in the world working
on physics while staying
in friends' houses.
And I got the idea of
turning this into a thing.
We could have a network
of science hostels
where theoretical
researchers could go--
>>NOORY: Not a bad idea.
>>LISI: --and work on stuff in a
very low-stress, very enjoyable
environment.
So I had a hard time
persuading people
to give me their
houses for this,
but I had enough resources that
I bought my own house in Maui.
>>NOORY: And now
you do your thing?
>>LISI: Now I run it as a
small science institute--
>>NOORY: Good for you.
>>LISI: --called the
Pacific Science Institute.
>>NOORY: Garrett, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief".
You at least opened up our
minds to more possibilities--
>>LISI: Good, I hope so.
>>NOORY: --and I appreciate it.
We call him the
subversive physicist.
Now you know why.
I'm George Noory and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief".